---
layout: page
title: Resume
permalink: /resume/
---

More than anything this is a time capsule for me. No one cares about all my jobs headed back to the dawn of time.

_(Updated July 2025)_

**PROFESSIONAL OVERVIEW**

---

*   Two decades of design and administration experience working with RDBMS, MPP, and PaaS systems in both transactional and analytical settings
*   Manager and principal individual contributor experienced working with senior leadership and customers to gather requirements and create quality analytical products, both on-premise and in the cloud
*   DevOps grasp related to data engineering processes in AWS, GCP, and Azure
*   I enjoy building teams and mentoring individuals to help them further their career ambitions and increase their technology knowledge
*   Earned MSIT from Carnegie Mellon University and graduated with the highest distinction granted

**EXPERIENCE**

---

**_PRINCIPAL DATA ENGINEER_**\
June 2025 - Present\
_Avenue Four Analytics • Pittsburgh, PA_

*  🏇

**_MANAGER OF DATA ENGINEERING_**\
October 2022 - June 2025\
_Dick's Sporting Goods • Remote (worked principally from Pittsburgh, PA)_

*  As a Manager of Data Engineering, worked within the Tech organization’s functional areas to provide data deliverables across sales, demand, fulfillment, inventory, marketing, eCommerce, customer support, and clickstream data, primarily in BigQuery.
*  Consumed terabytes data from various source systems, including Oracle, Kafka, and third party systems, primarily through Python and SQL.
*  Managed a group of five data engineers (from lead to junior) to support business needs coming from the Marketing (digital media, addressable media, loyalty, analytics), eCommerce, and Customer Support departments.
*  Responsible for the entire lifecycle of reporting on clickstream data generated by Adobe Analytics, including ELT in Python and SQL from the source to GCS and ultimately BigQuery.
*  Migrated various pipelines from GCP to Azure, including movement of data from BigQuery to Snowflake using Databricks and Python.
*  Acted as a technical advisor for both the media network and loyalty replatforming efforts, ensuring data needs would be met upon project completion.

**_DIRECTOR OF DATA ENGINEERING_**\
January 2022 - July 2022\
_Chess.com • Remote (worked principally from Pittsburgh, PA)_

*   As the Director of Data Engineering, helped orchestrate the movement of terabytes of on-premise MySQL databases into GCP using a combination of MySQL replication, GCP Compute Engine, and Datastream. Data was then stored and supplied to stakeholders through tailored BigQuery datasets through Grow and Google Sheets.
*   Helped to create conformed definitions of various business objects and consolidate data sources and logic to ensure data accuracy and availability.
*   As the first data engineering hire, built the culture of the data organization and helped to educate the engineering organization around best practices for data capture and overall data-centric thinking.

**_MANAGER, BIG DATA AND REPORTING_**\
March 2018 - December 2021

**_SENIOR BIG DATA ENGINEER_**\
August 2014 – March 2018  
_Proofpoint • Pittsburgh, PA_

_(Note: Wombat Security Technologies was acquired by Proofpoint in March 2018)_

*   As Manager, Big Data and Reporting, responsible for the creation and management of Proofpoint Security Awareness Training’s near-real time data warehouse and BI applications for internal and customer-facing reporting. 
*   Using technologies within AWS, built in Amazon Redshift and later a PostgreSQL data warehouse that incrementally updates every 15 minutes, allowing for a consistently updated environment able to power all reporting needs.
*   Maintain this infrastructure across three production environments in the US, EU, and AP.
*   Responsible for DevOps within AWS connected to data engineering purposes.
*   Act as DBA for transactional database performance improvements in MySQL environments. 
*   Develop BI solutions using Qlik Sense, Logi Info, JavaScript, and custom Java/Python code.
*   Responsible for the creation of complex SQL used for internal analysis of data.
*   Guides a team of 4 internal Data Engineers, 2-3 consulting resources, and works with PM and Technical Project Management in determining the direction and strategy of the team.

**_DATA SYSTEMS ARCHITECT_**\
May 2012 – August 2014\
_Millennium Pharmacy Systems • Pittsburgh, PA_

*   As Data Systems Architect, responsible for the creation and management of BI applications within the organization, including requirements gathering with senior executives, data modeling, and overall ownership of SSAS, SSIS, and SSRS processes.
*   Responsible for eight data marts ranging in size from tens to hundreds of gigabytes and pulling from multiple internal transactional systems, as well as Microsoft Dynamics and other third party data collectors, comprised of approximately five terabytes worth of source data.
*   Continually engage top executives and financial users in consultative strategy discussions to determine how to best use technology to meet business objectives.

**_DIRECTOR OF BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE_**\
April 2011 – May 2012\
_SnapRetail (formerly OneCoast) • Pittsburgh, PA_

*   As Director of BI, responsible for overseeing reporting requirements and implementation, including interfacing with customers, creating necessary database infrastructure, and creating reports and reporting tools, including SSIS, SSAS, SSRS, Excel, and web based reports.
*   Organized sprints and releases with the team and owners using the VersionOne product management tool.
*   Managed development teams consisting of software engineers and database developers.
*   Continually engaged our customers in consultative strategy discussions to determine how to best use technology to meet business objectives.

**_DIRECTOR OF TECHNOLOGY SERVICES_**\
March 2010 – April 2011

*   As Director of TS, responsible for overseeing the Agile software development process for the Technical Services department, which at the time served the two largest sales organizations in the gift and home décor industry in the United States, as well as various internal projects.
*   Organized sprints and releases with the team and owners using the VersionOne product management tool.
*   Managed development teams consisting of software engineers and database developers.
*   Continually engaged our customers in consultative strategy discussions to determine how to best use technology to meet business objectives.
*   Acted as Scrum Master for the group.

**_SYSTEMS ANALYST_**\
November 2007 – March 2010

*   Developed and maintained the company’s data warehouse setting using SSIS packages, allowing for a consolidation of various company-wide systems and easier access to data.
*   Produced various data marts from the data warehouse, allowing for near instantaneous access of data through Excel 2007 pivot mechanisms and SQL Server Analysis Services.
*   Created a hierarchical reporting structure for various financial metrics within the company using SQL Server Reporting Services, giving almost real-time data on sales numbers.
*   Worked with the marketing department in the creation of targeted lists of customers, enabling personalized messages and increased ecommerce sales. 
*   Created various reporting capabilities using ADO.NET, VB.NET, C#, and Excel. 
*   Overall, through the creation of enhanced reporting capabilities, decreased runtimes of various business processes several hundred percent.

**_DATA PROGRAMMER/ANALYST_**\
May 2007 – November 2007\
_Communifax • Pittsburgh, PA_

*   Responsible for the creation of mailing lists for companies such as Verizon Wireless, Sheetz, and Dad’s Pet Care, enabling these and other businesses to engage in intelligent and effective marketing strategies.
*   Maintained and updated SQL Server 2000/2005 databases for these clients, and wrote scripts to fulfill list creation functions and various quality control checks.
*   Explored options in conjunction with the Analytics department in order to effectively model targeted marketing campaigns.
*   Streamlined and updated automated processes by converting SQL Server 2000 DTS packages into SQL Server 2005 Integration Services packages and by modernizing numerous scripts.
*   Consistently met inflexible deadlines and worked on multiple promotions simultaneously in a fast-paced work environment.

**_SENIOR RESEARCH ASSOCIATE_**\
September 2004 – May 2007\
_University of Pittsburgh Medical Center • Pittsburgh, PA_

*   Served as the data manager in a longitudinal study of childhood and adolescent depression and anxiety for the Department of Adolescent Psychiatry within the University of Pittsburgh.
*   Reduced data entry error and enhanced data integrity by instituting a double data entry system built with SQL Server stored procedures and an Access front end.
*   Improved performance of the legacy database system in Borland Paradox while migrating data.
*   Spearheaded an effort to convert nearly 100K paper documents into PDF format, and created an Access interface to query the documents, allowing for faster retrieval time and reducing space needs.

**RECENT TECHNOLOGIES UTILIZED**

---

| Area               | Technology                                                                                                                                                 |
|:-------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **_OS_**           | macOS, Ubuntu, Fedora, Windows                                                                                                                             |
| **_DATABASES_**    | PostgreSQL, MySQL, BigQuery, Snowflake, Databricks, Amazon Redshift, DynamoDB                                                                              |
| **_LANGUAGES_**    | SQL, Python, Java, JavaScript, C#, HTML, CSS                                                                                                               |
| **_APPLICATIONS_** | JetBrains DataGrip and PyCharm, VS Code, R, Git, dbt, Airflow, Parallels, Qlik Sense, WordPress, Attunity Replicate, Sublime Text, Slack, Jira, Confluence |
| **_CLOUD_**        | A variety of data and compute services across AWS, GCP, and Azure                                                                                          |

**EDUCATION**

---

**_MASTER OF SCIENCE IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY_ • _CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY_**

Pittsburgh, PA • Degree Date: August 2008 • QPA: 3.99/4.00 • Graduated with Highest Distinction
Interests: Database Management, Data Mining, Business Intelligence, and Management.

**_BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN MATHEMATICS • GROVE CITY COLLEGE_**

Grove City, PA • Degree Date: May 2004 • QPA: 3.88/4.00 • Summa Cum Laude Graduate
Member Kappa Mu Epsilon National Mathematics Honorary

**OUTSIDE INTERESTS**

---

Running, Biking, U.S. National Parks, Chess, Backgammon, Hiking, Music, Philosophy, Juggling, Pocket Watches, and a variety of other incredibly random topics.
